---
title: Sorting Algorithms I
date: 09-10-2023
slides: https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1258193
---

## Examples

### Selection Sort
```c
for (int i = 0; i < arr_length; i++) {
    int j = findMin(arr, i);
    swap(arr, i, j);
}
```

#### Observations
$\left(a_0,\ \dots\ ,a_i\right)$ &mdash; elements from $0$ to $(i-1)$ &mdash; are sorted and $\leq$ than all the rest of the array.

#### Correctness Proof

Define our loop invariant as follows:
> The array is a permutation of the original array, such that elements $a_0,\ \dots\ , a_{i-1}$ are sorted, and all of them are $\leq$ than elements $a_i,\ \dots\ , a_n$.

The invariant is established when $i = 0$ &mdash; this essentially is equivalent to saying, "The whole list is unsorted".

**Initialisation**:
$$\underset{i\ =\ 0}{\Big|} \ \big[a_0,\ \dots,\ a_n\big]$$

**Start of loop at $i$:**
$$\big[\ \underbrace{a_0,\ \dots,\ a_{i-1}}_{\text{sorted}}\ \underset{\underset{\leq}{i}}{\Big|}\ a_i,\ \dots, \ a_n \big]$$

**After finding minimum, and swapping:**

```c
int j = findMin(arr, i);
swap(arr, i, j);
```

$$\big[\ \underbrace{a_0,\ \dots,\ a_{i-1}}_{\text{sorted}}\ \underset{\underset{\leq}{i}}{\Big|}\ a_i, \underset{\leq}{\Big|}  a_{i+1},\ \dots, \ a_n \big]$$

Notice now that we've swapped, we know that $a_i$ is less than all the elements after it.

**Next Loop:**

```c
i++
```

$$\big[\ \underbrace{a_0,\ \dots,\ a_{i-1},\ a_i}_{\text{sorted}}\ \underset{\underset{\leq}{i+1}}{\Big|}\ a_{i+1},\ \dots, \ a_n \big]$$

Look, ma! It's the same thing as $i$, but we're one element after! Therefore, the loop invariant is still true after each iteration of the loop.

Therefore at the end of the loop, the invariant is still true! This, combined with the fact that $i = n$ means that the whole list is a sorted permutation of the original.

### Insertion Sort

Our main loop invariant is:
> The array $a$ is a permutation of the original array such that elements $\big[a_0,\ \dots,\ a_{i-1}\big]$ are sorted.

This main loop invariance is established when $i=0$, and is preserved in each iteration. So when the loop terminates at $i=n$, this is still true.

$$\big[\ \underset{i=0}{\Big|} \ a_0,\ \dots,\ a_n \ \big]$$

However, in order for the main loop invariance to be true, our `insert` algorithm needs to be proven to be correct &mdash; we'll need to use another loop invariant for the sub-loop within `insert`:
> The array $a$ is a permutation of the original array, such that the elements $a_0,\ \dots,\ a_{i-1}$ and $a_{i+1},\ \dots, \ a_n$ are sorted, and that $a[i] \leq$ the elements $a_{i+1},\ \dots, \ a_n$

This sub-loop is established when $i$ is initalised as $i = n$; it's preserved on every iteration. When the loop terminates $a_{i-1} \leq a_{i}$. Combined with our invariant, this implies that $a_0,\ \dots,\ a_n$ is sorted.