---
title: Sorting Algorithms II
date: 2023-10-12
slides: https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1258200
---

## Shellsort

Shellsort is a generalisation of insertion sort invented by Donald Shell (1959).

1. Choose a *stride length* $s$.
2. Run insertion sort on elements with the stride length (e.g. $a[0], a[s], a[2s], \dots, a[sn]$)
3. Then repeat again for the next elements over (e.g. $a[1], a[s+1], \dots$) until (e.g. $a[s-1], a[2s-1], \dots$)
4. Try again with a smaller stride length, until you hit a stride length of $1$ (normal insertion sort).

This striding can make shellsort faster than normal insertion sort, but choosing the optimal stride lengths is
a challenge in itself.

In fact, these 'gap sequences' affect the algorithm's complexity.

## Mergesort

1. Split the list in half.
2. Apply mergesort to each half.
3. Merge the two halves together in order.

### Correctness of mergesort
We can use induction ($n$ is the length of the array):
* For $n = 1$, the array is already sorted!
* For an $n$-array, if mergesort works for arrays with length $\lt n$ then it will work for both halves of the array &mdash; now we need to prove the merging actually works.
* For the merging, we can use the loop invariance trick:
    > * The output array, and both input arrays together, are a permutation of the two original input arrays.
    > * The output and both input arrays are sorted.
    > * Every element in the output array is $\leq$ any element in either of the two input arrays.

    This invariant is complete when the input arrays are both empty.
    And as the invariant is still true, this is proved to be correct.

