---
title: Variable-sized Data Collections (I)
date: 2023-10-23
slides: https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1265208
---

## Arrays

* *Fixed static* data structures stored contiguously in memory, and are preallocated at compile time.
* They are easy to implement and use and efficient for operations such as comparing, getting, and swapping elements.
* Sometimes we don't know the size of things ahead of time.

## Dynamic Data Structures

A *dynamic* data structure uses memory that is allocated at runtime, and that can change size.

Common use cases include:
* Queue &mdash; dynamic data that needs to be processed in order (FIFO).
* Stack &mdash; used for (recursive) function calls in programming languages
* Collections of data for stats (sets, bags).

## Abstract Data Collections

Here, for the sake of implementation, we define an *abstract data collection* which has three operations:
```rust
struct ADC<Item>
    // Add something into the collection.
    fn add(it: Item)

    // Retrieve an item from the collection.
    fn get() -> Item 

    // Is this collection empty?
    fn is_empty() -> bool
```

### Examples:

* *Stacks* &mdash; a FILO data structure where each element is `add()-ed` to the end, and `get()`-ed from the end.
* *Queues*: FIFO &mdash; `get()` the item that was added longest ago.
* *Priority Queues* &mdash; every element now has an attached priority; `get()` retrieves the elements with the highest priority.
* *Sets* &mdash; Collection of unique elements without order. `get()` isn't defined here.
* *Bags* (or *multisets*) &mdash; like sets, but allow repetition.

If we implement these data structures using arrays for $\mathcal O(1)$ complexity.