---
title: Variable-sized Data Collections (II)
slides: https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1265209
data: 2023-10-26
---

## Resizable Arrays
How do we get all the benefits of a fixed array, but keep the dynamic size nature for structures like stacks?

Well, an easy option is to resize our array when we need to.

Here, let's refer to the reserved memory for this array $A$ as $\text{Capacity}(A)$ and the total number of elements in the array (excluding non-used indexes) as $\big|A\big|$

### Example: Fixed Amounts
Let's try adding a *fixed* extra amount of capacity when we need to.

1. Let's say our array starts with $\text{Capacity}(A) = 100$
2. Let's add our first $100$ elements, so now $\text{Capacity}(A) = \big|A\big|$
3. We'll add a new element. Our existing area needs to be copied into a space in memory ($100$ operations). Then we can add our new element into the array.

In general, we can see the pattern here for total operations in adding $K$ elements is:
$$K + \underbrace{100\left[1 + 2 + \dots + \left(\left\lceil\frac{K}{100}\right\rceil  - 1\right)\right]}_{\text{Resizing operations.}}$$
$$K + 100 \cdot \frac{1}{2}\left(\left\lceil\frac{K}{100}\right\rceil - 1\right) \left\lceil\frac{K}{100}\right\rceil$$

As we have $K \cdot K$ in the ceiling functions, we can conclude that this is $\mathcal O\left(n^2\right)$ where $n$ is the length of the list.

### Example: Doubling It

Instead, let's try doubling the capacity of the array whenever we run out of space.

Now the sum looks like this (when resizing the array &mdash; worst case):

$$\underbrace{2^K +1}_{\text{Array pushes}} + \underbrace{\left[1 + 2 + 4 + \dots + 2^K\right]}_{\text{Resizes}}$$
$$2^K +1 + (2^{K+1} - 1)$$
$$2^K + 2 \cdot 2^{K} = 3 \cdot 2^K$$

Given that $2^K+1$ was the size of our list, this means that adding is now an $\mathcal O \left(n\right)$ operation!

We 