---
title: Hash Tables (I)
slides: https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1266621
date: 2023-10-30
---

## What is a Hash Table?

Hash tables associate data values with their own unique key.
$$\left[\begin{array}{lcl}
    \text{Beavers} & \rightarrow & \text{2}\\
    \text{Cats} & \rightarrow & \text{5}\\
    \text{Foxes} & \rightarrow & \text{10}\\
\end{array}\right]$$

### Operations

* $\text{put}(\underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{key}}{k}, \underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{value}}{v})$
    Insert a key-value pair into the table. 
* $\text{get}(\underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{key}}{k}) \rightarrow \underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{value}}{v}$
    Retrieve a value using its associated key from the table. 
* $\text{delete}(\underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{key}}{k})$
    Retrieve a value using its associated key from the table. 
* $\text{contains}(\underset{\vphantom{\big[]}\text{key}}{k}) \rightarrow \text{boolean}$
    Check whether an entry exists in the table.

## Implementations 
### Direct Addressing
An example in our pets scenario would be to:
1. Assign each pet species an ID number (an *index*)
2. Allocate an array large enough to be indexed by these IDs, with `null` entries to pad the length of the array to match (for instance, a 2-digit ID).

This gives $\mathcal O\left(1\right)$ complexity and can be adapted to work with any type of key.

But the problem is size. For example if we use a $16$-bit integer to store just $100$ things, that would waste $(1 - \frac{100}{2^{16}})\approx 99.85%$ of all the memory!

### Hashing
1. Allocate an array $A$ of suitable size $\big|A\big|$. 
2. Introduce a **hash function** to map keys to an index in our array:
    $$h: K \rightarrow \Big[0,\big|A\big|\Big) \cap \N$$
    Where
    * $K$ is the set containing all our keys.
3. Store the item with key $k$ at element $A_{h(k)}$.

An example for a hash function could be:
$$h(k) := k \bmod M$$

* This setup is officially what a **hash table** is.
* The hash function maps keys to **hash codes**. 
* The element $A_{h(k)}$ corresponding to the key $k$ is known as a **bucket** associated with hash code $h(k)$.

#### Collisions

The problem is the set of keys $K$, is typically larger than the set of available hash codes (which is the entire goal of a hash table).

This means, as $\big|K\big| \ge \big|A\big|$, that our hash function $h(k)$ is not injective, i.e. there exists $k_1, k_2 \in K$ such that $h(k_1) = h(k_2)$.

This special case is known as a collision.

#### Solutions

##### 1. Hope for the best
This isn't great, as the statistical chance of a collision occurring goes up quite quickly the more data you store.

##### 2. Chaining
Instead of storing single values in each bucket, what about storing a linked list of key-value pairs in each bucket?

So for example, if $k_1, k_2$ have the same hash, then when we $\text{put}(k_1 v_1)$ and then $\text{put}(k_2, v_2)$, our hashmap would contain an element $A_{h(k_1)} = \big[(k_1, v_1), (k_2, v_2)\big]$ &mdash; a linked list of length $2$.

Then when we execute $\text{get}(k_2)$ or $\text{delete}(k_2)$, we first get $A_{h(k_1)}$, then look through until we get to $(k_2, v_2)$.

##### 3. Open addressing

Instead of storing the collection in each bucket, why don't we just use our empty spaces?

So, if $h(k_1) = h(k_2)$ and $A_{h(k_1)}$ already exists, put $v_2$ in $A_{h(k_1)+1}$.

As long as you put less data than $\big|A\big|$, they'll be enough space.