---
title: Supervised Learning
slides:  https://moodle.bath.ac.uk/mod/resource/view.php?id=1257597
---

## But what is supervised learning?

A supervised learning model maps one or more inputs to one or more outputs.

An **inference** computes the inputs from the specified outputs.

You can think of a model as a *family* of equations, with configurable *parameters* which specify a particular equation.

*Training* a model involves finding these parameters to predict outputs from the inputs seen in a training dataset of input/output pairs.

### Notation

| Symbol | Represents | Notes |
|--------|------------|-------|
| $\mathrm x$ | Input | Scalar input |
| $\mathrm{\bf{x}}$ || (Bold) Vector input |
| $\mathrm{\bf{X}}$ || (Bold Capital) Matrix input |
| $\mathrm y$ | Output | Output |
| $\mathrm{y = f\left[x\right]}$ | Model | $\mathrm{f}$ returns scalar, $\mathrm{\bf{f}}$ returns vector, $\mathrm{\bf{F}}$ returns matrix |
| $\phi$ | Parameters | |

#### Example

Input: $\mathbf{x} = \left[\begin{matrix}\text{age}\\\text{milage}\end{matrix}\right]$

Output: $\mathrm{y} = \left[\text{price}\right]$

Model: $\mathrm{y = f[\bf{x}]}$

### Model

A model takes parameters $\phi$ and can be shown as:
> $$y = \mathbf f\left[\mathbf x, \phi\right]$$

### Loss Function

A loss/cost function measured 'how bad' the model is:

> $$L\left[\phi,\ f[\mathbf x, \phi],\ \left\{\mathbf x_i, \mathbf y_i\right\}^I_{i=1}\right]$$

where $I$ is the number of input/output pairs in the training set.

It returns a scalar number, where a lower value is better.

We can shorten this to just: $L[\phi]$.

### Training

We can find the best set of parameters that minimise the loss function:

$$\hat\phi = \argmin_\phi \left[L\left[\phi\right]\right]$$

### Testing
We run the model on a test dataset to see how good it is a *generalizing* to new data.

## Example 1D Model

$$\mathrm y = \mathrm f \left[\mathrm x, \phi\right] = \phi_0 + \phi_1 \mathrm x$$

With parameters $\phi = \left[\begin{matrix}\phi_0\\\phi_1\end{matrix}\right]$

We can think of this as fitting a straight line to points (linear regression).

We can use a simple "least squares" function for our loss function: 
$$L\left[\phi\right] = \sum_{i=1}^I \left(\mathrm f \left[x_i, \phi\right] - y_i\right)^2$$